OSDOCS-6393: revise install instructions embedding in image (#61003)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/microshift-creating-ostree-iso.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// microshift/microshift-embed-into-rpm-ostree.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="microshift-creating-ostree-iso_{context}"]
= Creating the {op-system-ostree-first} image

Use the following procedure to create the ISO. The {op-system-ostree} Installer image pulls the commit from the running container and creates an installable boot ISO with a Kickstart file configured to use the embedded OSTree commit.

.Prerequisites
* Your build host meets the Image Builder system requirements.
* You have installed and set up Image Builder and the `composer-cli` tool.
* You have root-user access to your build host.
* You have the `podman` tool.

> //Q: Should podman have come with a RHEL package? Is it just `# yum install podman`? We can make that step #1 if easier for our users.

Reviewer: It's just `sudo dnf install -y podman`, however I would leave it as-is. 
If we start giving commands, we should also give those for other prereqs

Author: Interesting, the RHEL docs DO give single commands in the prereqs, for example here: https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/9/html/building_running_and_managing_containers/using-the-container-tools-api 
I'm not sure what our rules on this are in OCP,  but I can check. 
I cannot find a good "additional resource" link for users that aren't familiar with podman.

.Procedure

. Start an `ostree` container image build by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
BUILDID=$(sudo composer-cli compose start-ostree --ref "rhel/9/$(uname -m)/edge" minimal-microshift edge-container | awk '{print $2}')
----
+
This command also returns the identification (ID) of the build for monitoring.

. You can check the status of the build periodically by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
# sudo composer-cli compose status
----
+
.Example output of a running build

[source,terminal]
----
ID                                     Status     Time                      Blueprint            Version   Type               Size
cc3377ec-4643-4483-b0e7-6b0ad0ae6332   RUNNING    Wed Jun 7 12:26:23 2023   minimal-microshift   0.0.1     edge-container

> >> End example output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

----
+
.Example output of a completed build

[source,terminal]
----
ID                                     Status     Time                      Blueprint            Version   Type               Size
cc3377ec-4643-4483-b0e7-6b0ad0ae6332   FINISHED   Wed Jun 7 12:32:37 2023   minimal-microshift   0.0.1     edge-container

> >> End example output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

----

. Download the container image using the ID and get the image ready for use by running the following commands:
+
[source,terminal]
----
# sudo composer-cli compose image ${BUILDID}
sudo chown $(whoami). ${BUILDID}-container.tar
sudo chmod a+r ${BUILDID}-container.tar

> ----

Reviewer: We need to either add the `#` / `$` prompt sign to all commands, or none

> //Q: Can we break these into three explained commands in series in this step? It's a general rule; helps support know where something may have gone wrong

Reviewer: Yes, we can move the last 2 commands into a separate section and state that they ensure that the downloaded container image is owned and readable by the current user.

> . Bootstrap a server on port 8085 for the `ostree` container image to be consumed by the ISO by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Bootstrap a server on port 8085 for the `ostree` container image to be consumed by the ISO build step by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
# cat > microshift-installer.toml <<EOF
name = "microshift-installer"

description = ""
version = "0.0.0"
modules = []
groups = []
packages = []
EOF
----

. Add the blueprint to the Image Builder by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
+
----
# sudo composer-cli blueprints push microshift-installer.toml
----

. Start the `ostree` ISO build by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
BUILDID=$(sudo composer-cli compose start-ostree --url http://localhost:8085/repo/ --ref "rhel/9/$(uname -m)/edge" microshift-installer edge-installer | awk '{print $2}')
----
+
This command also returns the identification (ID) of the build for monitoring.

. You can check the status of the build periodically by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
# sudo composer-cli compose status
----
+
.Example output for a running build
+
[source,terminal]
----
ID                                     Status     Time                      Blueprint              Version   Type               Size
c793c24f-ca2c-4c79-b5b7-ba36f5078e8d   RUNNING    Wed Jun 7 13:22:20 2023   microshift-installer   0.0.0     edge-installer

> >>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

----
+
.Example output for a completed build
+
[source,terminal]
----
ID                                     Status     Time                      Blueprint              Version   Type               Size
c793c24f-ca2c-4c79-b5b7-ba36f5078e8d   FINISHED   Wed Jun 7 13:34:49 2023   microshift-installer   0.0.0     edge-installer

> >>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

----

. Download the ISO using the ID and get the ISO ready for use by running the following commands
+
[source,terminal]
----
# sudo composer-cli compose image ${BUILDID}
sudo chown $(whoami). ${BUILDID}-installer.iso
sudo chmod a+r ${BUILDID}-installer.iso

> ----

Reviewer: Here again, we need the `#` prompt for all 3 commands, or none.
Note that you can split the last 2 commands into a separate block if you like, stating that they ensure that the downloaded ISO file is owned and readable by the current user.

> //Q: Can we break these into three explained commands in series in this step? It's a general rule; helps support know where something may have gone wrong

Reviewer: Yes, we can split the last 2 commands into a separate block if you like, stating that they ensure that the downloaded ISO file is owned and readable by the current user.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// microshift/microshift-embed-into-rpm-ostree.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="microshift-creating-ostree-iso_{context}"]
= Creating the {op-system-ostree-first} image

Use the following procedure to create the ISO. The {op-system-ostree} Installer image pulls the commit from the running container and creates an installable boot ISO with a Kickstart file configured to use the embedded OSTree commit.

.Prerequisites
* Your build host meets the Image Builder system requirements.
* You have installed and set up Image Builder and the `composer-cli` tool.
* You have root-user access to your build host.
* You have the `podman` tool.

.Procedure

. Start an `ostree` container image build by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> BUILDID=$(sudo composer-cli compose start-ostree --ref "rhel/9/$(uname -m)/edge" minimal-microshift edge-container | awk '{print $2}')

Reviewer 2: Is there an extra step not documented ? When I run this command, I receive the following response

_ERROR: UnknownBlueprint: Unknown blueprint name: minimal-microshift_

Author: @ggiguash I think this speaks to what Doug noticed. Do we need to move some steps around?

Author: @dhensel-rh I think we have the step you need in the next module, adding service to blueprint:

https://61003--docspreview.netlify.app/microshift/latest/microshift_install/microshift-embed-in-rpm-ostree.html#adding-microshift-service_microshift-embed-in-rpm-ostree

So maybe we need a separate module for creating the blueprint that is called before the image creation of the ostree iso. @ggiguash What do you think?

Reviewer 3: Yes, this is exactly the error I saw. I think if you swap the order of the existing modules it will fix the problem, right?

Author: Will it? Can we do all the steps of adding the service the blueprint first? Or do we need to 
1) create the blueprint, 
2) create the ostree iso, then 
3) add the service to the blueprint?

Reviewer 2: Yes, swap the order (and possibly combine the two procedures into one procedure). I tried this on a fresh machine. The minimal-microshift blueprint needs to exist first, since it is used in Creating the Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) for Edge image, _Procedure,_ Step 1

Example Image Builder blueprint with MicroShift
Creating the Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) for Edge image

Author: @dhensel-rh and @ggiguash I swapped the order of the modules. Please check the steps.

Author: @dhensel-rh I'll resolve this comment because you are retesting with the command changes from @dhellmann.

Reviewer 2: @ShaunaDiaz I'm ok with resolving

> ----

Reviewer 3: In the rendered output, this step is coming before the step that creates the `minimal-microshift.toml` file and pushes it up to the composer API.

Author: @dhellmann I am not following. Are steps out of order?

Reviewer 3: Yes. This step says to use a blueprint ("minimal-microshift") that has not been created in the workflow up to that point.

Reviewer: I think the order is correct because `minimal-microshift` has already been made available to composer-cli here:
https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/61003/files#diff-be6a1b04f4fe3b1a11c5f4e02cfc56d258efcb6fac9405cc51cd001e26b82a07R50

cc3377ec-4643-4483-b0e7-6b0ad0ae6332   RUNNING    Wed Jun 7 12:26:23 2023   minimal-microshift   0.0.1     edge-container
----
+
.Example output of a completed build

[source,terminal]
----
ID                                     Status     Time                      Blueprint            Version   Type               Size
cc3377ec-4643-4483-b0e7-6b0ad0ae6332   FINISHED   Wed Jun 7 12:32:37 2023   minimal-microshift   0.0.1     edge-container
----

. Download the container image using the ID and get the image ready for use by running the following commands:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo composer-cli compose image ${BUILDID}
----

. Check that the downloaded container image is owned by the current user by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo chown $(whoami). ${BUILDID}-container.tar
----

. Check that the image is able to be read by the current user by running the following commands:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo chmod a+r ${BUILDID}-container.tar
----

. Bootstrap a server on port 8085 for the `ostree` container image to be consumed by the ISO build step by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> IMAGEID=$(cat < "./${BUILDID}-container.tar" | sudo podman load | grep -o -P '(?<=sha256[@:])[a-z0-9]*')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ IMAGEID=$(cat < "./${BUILDID}-container.tar" | sudo podman load | grep -o -P '(?<=sha256[@:])[a-z0-9]*')
```

$ sudo podman run -d --name=minimal-microshift-server -p 8085:8080 ${IMAGEID}
----
+
This command also returns the ID of the container saved in the `IMAGEID` variable for monitoring.

. Generate the installer blueprint file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> # cat > microshift-installer.toml <<EOF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ cat > microshift-installer.toml <<EOF
```

name = "microshift-installer"

description = ""
version = "0.0.0"
modules = []
groups = []
packages = []
EOF
----

. Add the blueprint to the Image Builder by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
+
----
$ sudo composer-cli blueprints push microshift-installer.toml
----

. Start the `ostree` ISO build by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> BUILDID=$(sudo composer-cli compose start-ostree --url http://localhost:8085/repo/ --ref "rhel/9/$(uname -m)/edge" microshift-installer edge-installer | awk '{print $2}')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ BUILDID=$(sudo composer-cli compose start-ostree --url http://localhost:8085/repo/ --ref "rhel/9/$(uname -m)/edge" microshift-installer edge-installer | awk '{print $2}')
```

----
+
This command also returns the identification (ID) of the build for monitoring.

. You can check the status of the build periodically by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo composer-cli compose status
----
+
.Example output for a running build
+
[source,terminal]
----
ID                                     Status     Time                      Blueprint              Version   Type               Size
c793c24f-ca2c-4c79-b5b7-ba36f5078e8d   RUNNING    Wed Jun 7 13:22:20 2023   microshift-installer   0.0.0     edge-installer
----
+
.Example output for a completed build
+
[source,terminal]
----
ID                                     Status     Time                      Blueprint              Version   Type               Size
c793c24f-ca2c-4c79-b5b7-ba36f5078e8d   FINISHED   Wed Jun 7 13:34:49 2023   microshift-installer   0.0.0     edge-installer
----

. Download the ISO using the ID and get the ISO ready for use by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo composer-cli compose image ${BUILDID}
----

> . Check that the downloaded container image is owned by the current user by running the following command:

Reviewer: It's not "check" - it's "make sure"

Author: @ggiguash I can make these verification steps, which is what peer review will say to do. LMK if it doesn't look right to you.

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo chown $(whoami). ${BUILDID}-installer.iso
----

> . Check that the image is able to be read by the current user by running the following commands:

Reviewer: It's not "check" - it's "make sure"

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// microshift/microshift-embed-into-rpm-ostree.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="microshift-creating-ostree-iso_{context}"]
= Creating the {op-system-ostree-first} image

Use the following procedure to create the ISO. The {op-system-ostree} Installer image pulls the commit from the running container and creates an installable boot ISO with a Kickstart file configured to use the embedded OSTree commit.

.Prerequisites
* Your build host meets the Image Builder system requirements.
* You have installed and set up Image Builder and the `composer-cli` tool.
* You have root-user access to your build host.
* You have the `podman` tool.

.Procedure

. Start an `ostree` container image build by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ BUILDID=$(sudo composer-cli compose start-ostree --ref "rhel/9/$(uname -m)/edge" minimal-microshift edge-container | awk '{print $2}')
----
+
This command also returns the identification (ID) of the build for monitoring.

. You can check the status of the build periodically by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ sudo composer-cli compose status

Reviewer 2: Would it be appropriate to add the watch command to the beginning of this line  ? It will poll the command based on a time interval. 

_watch sudo composer-cli compose status_

Reviewer: In the description, we tell the user to check the status of the build `periodicaly`. While `watch` has the same effect, I think we may want to avoid it here because then, we need to explain what it does, how to quit it, etc.
Any average user should automatically fall back to using `watch` when asked to check `periodically`, I think

Reviewer 2: That makes sense. Introducing something like `watch` might cause an unintended issue.

----
+
.Example output of a running build

[source,terminal]
----
ID                                     Status     Time                      Blueprint            Version   Type               Size
cc3377ec-4643-4483-b0e7-6b0ad0ae6332   RUNNING    Wed Jun 7 12:26:23 2023   minimal-microshift   0.0.1     edge-container
----
+
.Example output of a completed build

[source,terminal]
----
ID                                     Status     Time                      Blueprint            Version   Type               Size
cc3377ec-4643-4483-b0e7-6b0ad0ae6332   FINISHED   Wed Jun 7 12:32:37 2023   minimal-microshift   0.0.1     edge-container
----

. Download the container image using the ID and get the image ready for use by running the following commands:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo composer-cli compose image ${BUILDID}
----

> . Check that the downloaded container image is owned by the current user by running the following command:

Reviewer 2: The chown command actually changes the owner of the file. It is not really checking who the owner of the file is.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Change the ownership of the downloaded container image to the current user by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo chown $(whoami). ${BUILDID}-container.tar
----

> . Check that the image is able to be read by the current user by running the following commands:

Reviewer 2: The chmod command changes the permissions of the image so the user can read the file. It is not checking read permissions. The wording seems off.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Add the current user read permissions to the image  by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo chmod a+r ${BUILDID}-container.tar
----

> . Bootstrap a server on port 8085 for the `ostree` container image to be consumed by the ISO build step by running the following command:

Reviewer 2: Is this one command or two commands ? It looks like two commands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Bootstrap a server on port 8085 for the `ostree` container image to be consumed by the ISO build step by running the following commands:
```

----
+
This command also returns the identification (ID) of the build for monitoring.

. You can check the status of the build periodically by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo composer-cli compose status
----
+
.Example output for a running build
+
[source,terminal]
----
ID                                     Status     Time                      Blueprint              Version   Type               Size
c793c24f-ca2c-4c79-b5b7-ba36f5078e8d   RUNNING    Wed Jun 7 13:22:20 2023   microshift-installer   0.0.0     edge-installer
----
+
.Example output for a completed build
+
[source,terminal]
----
ID                                     Status     Time                      Blueprint              Version   Type               Size
c793c24f-ca2c-4c79-b5b7-ba36f5078e8d   FINISHED   Wed Jun 7 13:34:49 2023   microshift-installer   0.0.0     edge-installer
----

. Download the ISO using the ID and get the ISO ready for use by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo composer-cli compose image ${BUILDID}
----

.Verification

> . Verify that the downloaded container image is owned by the current user by running the following command:

Reviewer 2: Similar wording needed here, like at line 58

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo chown $(whoami). ${BUILDID}-installer.iso
----

> . Verify that the image is able to be read by the current user by running the following commands:

Reviewer 2: Similar wording needed here, like at line 65

* You have the `podman` tool.

.Procedure

. Start an `ostree` container image build by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ BUILDID=$(sudo composer-cli compose start-ostree --ref "rhel/9/$(uname -m)/edge" minimal-microshift edge-container | awk '{print $2}')
----
+
This command also returns the identification (ID) of the build for monitoring.

. You can check the status of the build periodically by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo composer-cli compose status
----
+
.Example output of a running build

[source,terminal]
----
ID                                     Status     Time                      Blueprint            Version   Type               Size
cc3377ec-4643-4483-b0e7-6b0ad0ae6332   RUNNING    Wed Jun 7 12:26:23 2023   minimal-microshift   0.0.1     edge-container
----
+
.Example output of a completed build

[source,terminal]
----
ID                                     Status     Time                      Blueprint            Version   Type               Size
cc3377ec-4643-4483-b0e7-6b0ad0ae6332   FINISHED   Wed Jun 7 12:32:37 2023   minimal-microshift   0.0.1     edge-container
----

> [NOTE]

Author: Oooo good catch! That was the problem, yep.

====
You can use the `watch` command to monitor your build if you are familiar with how to start and stop it.
====

. Download the container image using the ID and get the image ready for use by running the following commands:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo composer-cli compose image ${BUILDID}
----

. Change the ownership of the downloaded container image to the current user by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ sudo chown $(whoami). ${BUILDID}-container.tar

Reviewer 2: I am curious why there is a period after the $(whoami) here. It doesn't seem to affect the result. Question for my general knowledge.

Author: @dhellmann for you

Reviewer: @dhensel-rh , the period after the user name in `chown` command sets the default user group ownership. It's a standard shortcut to write `user.main_group`

Reviewer 2: Thanks @ggiguash

----

> . Add current-user read permissions to the image by running the following command:

Reviewer 4: Maybe reword to avoid the compound adjective here for clarity?
```suggestion
. Add read permissions for the current user to the image by running the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo chmod a+r ${BUILDID}-container.tar
----

. Bootstrap a server on port 8085 for the `ostree` container image to be consumed by the ISO build using the following two steps.

> .. Get the IMAGEID result by running the following command:

Reviewer 4: Should `IMAGEID` be in backticks here and below?

Author: Yes, it should, it is a variable value. Adding.

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ IMAGEID=$(cat < "./${BUILDID}-container.tar" | sudo podman load | grep -o -P '(?<=sha256[@:])[a-z0-9]*')
----

.. Use the IMAGEID result to execute the podman command step by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo podman run -d --name=minimal-microshift-server -p 8085:8080 ${IMAGEID}
----
+
This command also returns the ID of the container saved in the `IMAGEID` variable for monitoring.

. Generate the installer blueprint file by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ cat > microshift-installer.toml <<EOF
name = "microshift-installer"

description = ""
version = "0.0.0"
modules = []
groups = []
packages = []
EOF
----

[id="microshift-add-blueprint-build-iso_{context}"]

> == Add the blueprint to Image Builder and build the ISO

Reviewer 4: This should be a separate module (only one proc per module according to mod docs)

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ BUILDID=$(sudo composer-cli compose start-ostree --url http://localhost:8085/repo/ --ref "rhel/9/$(uname -m)/edge" microshift-installer edge-installer | awk '{print $2}')
----
+
This command also returns the identification (ID) of the build for monitoring.

. You can check the status of the build periodically by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo composer-cli compose status
----
+
.Example output for a running build
+
[source,terminal]
----
ID                                     Status     Time                      Blueprint              Version   Type               Size
c793c24f-ca2c-4c79-b5b7-ba36f5078e8d   RUNNING    Wed Jun 7 13:22:20 2023   microshift-installer   0.0.0     edge-installer
----
+
.Example output for a completed build
+
[source,terminal]
----
ID                                     Status     Time                      Blueprint              Version   Type               Size
c793c24f-ca2c-4c79-b5b7-ba36f5078e8d   FINISHED   Wed Jun 7 13:34:49 2023   microshift-installer   0.0.0     edge-installer
----

[id="microshift-download-iso-prep-for-use_{context}"]

> == Download the ISO and prepare it for use

Reviewer 4: Same here, new procedure module

. Download the ISO using the ID by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ sudo composer-cli compose image ${BUILDID}
----

. Change the ownership of the downloaded container image to the current user by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ sudo chown $(whoami). ${BUILDID}-installer.iso

Reviewer 2: I am curious why there is a period after the $(whoami) here. It doesn't seem to affect the result. Question for my general knowledge.

----

> . Add current-user read permissions to the image by running the following command:

Reviewer 4: Same comment about "current-user" as above
